The political standoff in the nation’s capital ended just minutes before a midnight deadline when the government’s ability to borrow money would have expired. Republicans conceded defeat on Wednesday by agreeing to finance the operations of government until Jan. 15 and raise the nation’s debt limit through the middle of February. The Senate passed the legislation first, and the House followed around 10:15 p.m.

The agreement paves the way for another series of budget negotiations in the weeks ahead, even as conservative Republicans in the House and Senate vowed to renew their fight for cuts in spending and changes to the Affordable Care Act.

Just hours after Mr. Obama signed the temporary spending measure into law around 12:30 a.m., agencies in Washington and across the country prepared to reopen offices, public parks, research projects and community programs that have been mothballed for more than two weeks. The government’s top personnel officer announced that officials should restart normal functions “in a prompt and orderly manner.”

In Washington, the city’s subway trains were once again packed with federal workers streaming in from the suburbs, government IDs dangling from lanyards around their necks. At the Lincoln Memorial, tourists waited nearby as a park ranger cut down the signs announcing that the memorial was closed.

Robert Lagana said Thursday morning he was eager to get back to his job at the International Trade Commission.

“It beats climbing the walls, wondering where your next paycheck is going to be and how you’re going to make your bills,” Mr. Lagana said as he made his way to his office near L’Enfant Plaza.

But he also expressed frustration with lawmakers who held up the budget over the new health care law. “They really need to come up with a law where this never happens again,” he said, adding later, “You just feel like you don’t have a voice.”

At the Environmental Protection Agency headquarters in Washington, Vice President Joseph R. Biden Jr. showed up to see workers who had been furloughed.

“I brought some muffins!” Mr. Biden said as he arrived at the security desk. When he was asked about the shutdown, he said: “I’m happy it’s ended. It was unnecessary to begin with. I’m happy it’s ended.”

He greeted returning workers with handshakes and hugs.

The Smithsonian Institution announced via Twitter that its museums would reopen to the public on Thursday. The National Zoo’s popular “Panda Cam” was once again broadcasting live streams of the zoo’s newest panda cub by late Thursday morning, and officials said that the zoo would be open to visitors on Friday.

But how quickly other parts of the government will resume normal operations was not immediately clear.

Some federal agencies began offering employees guidance for their return to work. A memorandum from officials at the Department of the Interior encouraged returning workers to check their e-mail and voicemail, fill out their timecards and to “check on any refrigerators and throw out any perished food.”

The Interior memo hinted at how long it will take for the government to be fully functioning. It said snack bars at the main Interior building would be open on Thursday, but the cafeteria would be closed. Shuttles between Interior buildings in the capital will not be operating, the memorandum said.

Across the country, federal workers returned to work, and visitors returned to national historic sites.

In New York City, office workers poured in and out of the mammoth building at 26 Federal Plaza in Lower Manhattan on Thursday morning; some had been essential staff who worked through the shutdown, while others were eager to get back to the job – and start being paid again.

“Put yourself in that situation,” said Regina Napoli, 60, a legal administrator for the Social Security Administration who lives on Long Island. “The bills pile up.”

Her colleague, Selma Chan, 64, agreed. “We were feeling the strain financially and physically,” said Ms. Chan, whose younger daughter is a student at New York University. “We didn’t know what to do.”

Ms. Chan said she had mostly stayed at home in Flushing, Queens, and had contemplated borrowing money from her elderly mother to make ends meet. But on Thursday, she was beaming as she held up a brown paper bag with a latte and a grilled cheese sandwich – an indulgence she said was not possible the day before.

